## xploratory data analysis

It is important prior to starting any analysis to inspect data This can be done to check for any departures from normality or any existing trend. Principle plots like histogram, boxplots and measures of central tendency and dispersion can help detect distributions of data that deviates from the normal. In additions maps can aid illustrate any spatial trends.

## Data

We will mostly use the meuse dataset available in sp package. The meuse data set provided by package sp is a data set comprising of four heavy metals measured in the top soil in a flood plain along the river Meuse, along with a handful of covariates. The process governing heavy metal distribution seems that polluted sediment is carried by the river, and mostly deposited close to the river bank, and areas with low elevation. This document shows a Geostatistical analysis of this data set. The data set was introduced by Burrough and McDonnell, 1998.

## OUTLIER DETECTION

Values with NA (Not Applicable) are removed from any further analysis. To detect outliers, boxplot.stats()$out function is used. It is based on Tukey’s method designed to identify outliers and missing data above and below the 1.5 times the Inter Quartile Range (IQR). The IQR gives a statistical way to identify where the bulk of the statistical data points (the middle 50%) sit in the range, and how spread out that middle 50% is. Normally a range between the 1st quartile and 3rd quartie is used. However, using the IQR range would aggressively tag too many values as outliers. So Tukey established a 1.5 basis, stating that the IQR should be multiplied by 1.5. The designed function (Getoutlier), shows the percentage (%) and mean of outliers in a dataset. The mean of data with and without outliers is also illustrated by the function. The box-plot and histogram are used to best illustrate the outliers. In the function, the data with and without the outliers are plotted. Finally, with help from interactive input (yes/no) the outliers are kept or removed from data. If the answer is yes then outliers will be replaced with NA. Outliers is a result of several causes i.e. data entry error, equipment error, or some other random variation of factors. Instead of removing them, it’s best practice is to investigate why they exist, where they came from, and what they mean to the analysis. Common practice is to replace them with mean or median of data or at times replicate of neighbouring values in spatial analysis. In this excersis we choose to replace them with median of the original data. Median is preferred to mean because it is established that its a robust estimate of the mean. However, with deeper understanding of sampling framework, equioment used, working conditions etc, other methods are possible like use of regression etc.

